# Module 5: Performance
# Lab: Performance Issues

## Exercise 1: Designing for Efficient Queries

#### Task 1: Plan Indexes for Querying

1.  Ensure that the 10985C-MIA-DC and 10985C-MIA-SQL virtual machines are both running, and then log on to 10985C-MIA-SQL as **ADVENTUREWORKS\\Student** with the password **Pa$$w0rd**.

2.  In the **D:\\Labfiles\\Lab05\\Starter** folder, double-click **DatabaseQueryDesign.docx**.

3.  Plan which clustered and nonclustered indexes you would add to this design, based on the design of the tables and the common queries.

4.  In the **D:\\Labfiles\\Lab05\\Solution** folder, double-click **PossibleIndexStrategy.docx**.

5.  Review and discuss any differences between your strategy and the proposed index strategy in the document.

#### Task 2: Plan Indexes for Concurrency

1.  If the database in the design has handled many transactions, in addition to the listed queries, note the effects this could have on the transactions.

2.  Note the effects this could have on the listed queries.

3.  Note the changes that you might make to the index strategy to support transactions.


©2016 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode "Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License"), additional terms may apply.  All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant.  This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.
