# Module 5: Performance
# Demonstration: Nonsargable Queries

### Objectives

In this demonstration, you will see the effects of a nonsargable query.

### Preparation

1.	Ensure that the 10985C-MIA-DC and 10985C-MIA-SQL virtual machines are running and then log on to 10985C-MIA-SQL as **ADVENTUREWORKS\Student** with the password **Pa$$w0rd**. 

2.	Run **D:\Demofiles\Mod05\Setup.cmd** as an administrator to revert any changes.

### Demonstration Steps

1.  On the taskbar, click **Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio**.

2.  In the **Connect to Server** dialog box, in the **Server name** box, type **MIA-SQL**. Ensure **Windows Authentication** is selected in the **Authentication** box, and then click **Connect**.

3.  On the **File** menu, point to **Open**, click **File**, browse to the **D:\\Demofiles\\Mod05\\Demo2.sql** file, and then click **Open**.

4.  To turn statistics on, highlight the code under **Step 1** and click **Execute**.

5.  To run a query with no indexes, highlight the code under **Step 2** and click **Execute**.

6.  On the **Messages** tab, note the number of logical reads performed and the execution time.

8.  To create indexes, highlight the code under **Step 3** and click **Execute**.

9.  To run a query with indexes, highlight the code under **Step 4** and click **Execute**.

10. On the **Messages** tab, note the number of logical reads performed and the execution time. These values should be similar to those recorded earlier. This is because the query cannot use the indexes.

11.  To drop the indexes, highlight the code under **Step 5** and click **Execute**.

12.  Close SQL Server Management Studio without saving any changes.


©2016 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode "Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License"), additional terms may apply.  All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant.  This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.