# Module 1: Introduction to Databases
# Demonstration: Querying a SQL Server 2016 Database

### Objectives

In this demonstration, you will see how to:

- Use a SELECT statement to return all rows and columns from a table.

- Use a SELECT statement to return all rows and specific columns from a table.

- Use a WHERE clause to filter the rows that a SELECT statement returns.

- Use different operators in a WHERE clause.

### Preparation

Start the 10985C-MIA-DC and 10985C-MIA-SQL virtual machines, and then log on to 10985C-MIA-SQL as **ADVENTUREWORKS\Student** with the password **Pa$$w0rd**.

### Demonstration Steps

1. Open SQL Server Management Studio, and then connect to the **MIA-SQL** instance of the database engine by using Windows Authentication.

2. On the **File** menu, point to **Open**, click **File**, browse to **D:\Demofiles\Mod01**, click **TransactSQLQueries.sql**, and then click **Open**.

3. Select the statements under the comment *Return all rows from all columns in the Sales.SalesOrderHeader* table, and then click **Execute**.

4. Review the result set, noting the columns that the query returns and, in the bottom right-hand corner of the results set, the number of rows the query returned.

5. Select the SQL statement under the comment *Return all rows from the SalesOrderID and OrderDate columns from the Sales.SalesOrderHeader table*, and then click **Execute**.

6. Review the result set, noting the columns and the number of rows the query returned.

7. Select the SQL statement under the comment *Return only rows from the SalesOrderID, OrderDate, and SalesPersonID columns for which the SalespersonID = 282*, and then click **Execute**.

8. Review the result set, noting the columns and the number of rows the query returned. Note that the number of rows returned is much lower than for the previous two queries.

9. Select the SQL statement under the comment *Return only rows from the SalesOrderID, OrderDate, and SalesPersonID columns for which the SalespersonID > 282*, and then click **Execute**.

10. Review the result set, noting the columns and the number of rows the query returned. Note that the number of rows returned has increased again.

11. Select the SQL statement under the comment *Return only rows from the SalesOrderID and OrderDate columns for which the SalespersonID = 282 and the orderdate is from the year 2013*, and then click **Execute**.

12. Review the result set, noting the columns and the number of rows the query returned. This query returned the lowest number of rows because it contained the most restrictive filters. 

13.	Close the **TransactSQLQueries.sql** query window and do not save any changes. Close SQL Server Management Studio.


©2016 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode "Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License"), additional terms may apply.  All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant.  This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.
