# Module 6: Database Objects
# Demonstration: Creating and Using a Stored Procedure

### Objectives

In this demonstration, you will see how to:

-   Create a parameterized stored procedure.

-   Execute a stored procedure by passing input parameter values to it.

-   Verify the actions performed by the stored procedure.

### Preparation

1.	Ensure that the 10985C-MIA-DC and 10985C-MIA-SQL virtual machines are running and then log on to 10985C-MIA-SQL as **ADVENTUREWORKS\Student** with the password **Pa$$w0rd**. 

2.  In the **D:\\Demofiles\\Mod06** folder, right-click **Setup.cmd**, and then click **Run as administrator**.

3.  In the **User Account Control** dialog box, click **Yes**, and wait for setup to complete.

### Demonstration Steps

1.  Open **Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio**, and then connect to the **MIA-SQL** instance of the database engine by using Windows Authentication.

2.  On the **File** menu, point to **Open**, click **File**, browse to **D:\\Demofiles\\Mod06**, click **Create Stored Procedure.sql**, and then click **Open**.

3.  Under the comment **Create the stored procedure**, review the Transact-SQL statements, select them, and then click **Execute**.

4.  Under the comment **Execute the stored procedure**, review the Transact-SQL statement, select it, and then click **Execute**.

5.  Under the comment **View the results**, review the Transact-SQL statement, select it, and then click **Execute**.

6.  Review the results, noting that a row has been added to the **Person.Customer** table with the values specified in the EXEC statement.

7.  Close SQL Server Management Studio without saving any changes.


©2016 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode "Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License"), additional terms may apply.  All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant.  This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.