# Module 6: Database Objects
# Demonstration: Creating Databases and Tables

### Objectives

In this demonstration, you will see how to:

-   Create a database.

-   Create tables.

-   Create schemas.

-   Create a CHECK constraint.

-   Create a DEFAULT constraint.

-   Create a UNIQUE constraint.

### Preparation

1.	Ensure that the 10985C-MIA-DC and 10985C-MIA-SQL virtual machines are running and then log on to 10985C-MIA-SQL as **ADVENTUREWORKS\Student** with the password **Pa$$w0rd**. 

2.  In the **D:\\Demofiles\\Mod06** folder, right-click **Setup.cmd**, and then click **Run as administrator**.

3.  In the **User Account Control** dialog box, click **Yes**, and wait for setup to complete.

### Demonstration Steps

1.  Open **Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio**, and then connect to the **MIA-SQL** instance of the database engine by using **Windows Authentication**.

2.  On the **File** menu, point to **Open**, click **File**, browse to **D:\\Demofiles\\Mod06**, click **Create Tables.sql**, and then click **Open**.

3.  In the query window, under the comment **Create a database and change database context**, review the Transact-SQL statements, select them, and then click **Execute**.

4.  In the query window, under the comment **Create schemas**, review the Transact-SQL statements, select them, and then click **Execute**.

5.  In the query window, under the comment **Create tables**, review the Transact-SQL statements, select them, and then click **Execute**.

6.  In the query window, under the comment **Add CHECK constraint to Sales.Order**, review the Transact-SQL statement, select it, and then click **Execute**.

7.  In the query window, under the comment **Test CHECK constraint**, review the Transact-SQL statement, select it, and then click **Execute**.

8.  Review the results, and note that the insert fails because the order date is yesterday's date.

9. In the query window, under the comment **Add DEFAULT constraint to Person.CustomerDemographics**, review the Transact-SQL statement, select it, and then click **Execute**.

10. In the query window, under the comment **Test DEFAULT constraint**, review the Transact-SQL statements, select them, and then click **Execute**.

11. Review the results, and note that the insert succeeds and the default value ‘Unknown’ is entered.

12. In the query window, under the comment **Add UNIQUE constraint to Person.Employee**, review the Transact-SQL statement, select it, and then click **Execute**.

13. In the query window, under the comment **Test UNIQUE constraint**, review the Transact-SQL statements, select them, and then click **Execute**.

14. Review the results, and note that the first insert succeeds, but the second fails because it contains the duplicate **SSN** value ‘123’.

15. Close SQL Server Management Studio without saving changes.


©2016 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode "Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License"), additional terms may apply.  All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant.  This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.