# Module 4: Relationships
# Demonstration: Implementing Referential Integrity by Using a Foreign Key

### Objectives

In this demonstration, you will see how to:

-   Implement foreign key constraints.

-   Implement cascading referential integrity.

### Demonstration Steps

1.  Start the 10985C-MIA-DC and 10985C-MIA-SQL virtual machines, and then log on to 10985C-MIA-SQL as **ADVENTUREWORKS\\Student** with the password **Pa$$w0rd**.

2.  In the **D:\\Demofiles\\Mod04** folder, run **Setup.cmd** as Administrator.

3.  Open **Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio** and then connect to the **MIA-SQL** instance of the database engine by using **Windows Authentication**.

4.  On the **File** menu, point to **Open**, click **File**, browse to **D:\\Demofiles\\Mod04**, click **Referential Integrity.sql**, and then click **Open**.

5.  In the query window, under the comment *Create a database and change database context*, select the Transact-SQL statements and then click **Execute**.

6.  In the query window, under the comment *Create Customers table with a primary key constraint and four rows*, review the Transact-SQL statements, select the Transact-SQL statements, and then click **Execute**.

7.  In the query window, under the comment *Create a table with a foreign key constraint*, review the Transact-SQL statement, select the Transact-SQL statement, and then click **Execute**.

8.  In the query window, under the comment *Test foreign key constraint by adding an order with a valid CustomerID value*, review the Transact-SQL statements, select the Transact-SQL statements, and then click **Execute**.

9.  Note that the statement completes successfully.

10. In the query window, under the comment *Add an order with an invalid CustomerID value*, review the Transact-SQL statement, select the Transact-SQL statement, and then click **Execute**.

11. In the Results pane, review the message that states that the insert statement conflicted with the foreign key constraint.

12. In the query window, under the comment *Update a CustomerID value in Customers that has no matching value in Orders*, review the Transact-SQL statement, select the Transact-SQL statement, and then click **Execute**.

13. Note that the statement completes successfully.

14. In the query window, under the comment *Update a CustomerID value in Customers that has a matching value in Orders*, review the Transact-SQL statement, select the Transact-SQL statement, and then click **Execute**.

15. In the **Results** pane, review the message that states that the update statement conflicted with the constraint.

16. In the query window, under the comment *Drop foreign key and add new foreign key that specifies cascading referential integrity*, review the Transact-SQL statements, select the Transact-SQL statements, and then click **Execute**.

17. In the query window, under the comment *Test cascading referential integrity*, review the Transact-SQL statement, select the Transact-SQL statement, and then click **Execute**.

18. In the **Results** pane, review the results, noting that the row in the **Orders** table was successfully updated.

19. Close SQL Server Management Studio without saving changes.


©2016 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode "Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License"), additional terms may apply.  All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant.  This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.