# Module 1: Introduction to Databases
# Demonstration: Exploring a Relational Database

### Objectives

In this demonstration, you will see:

- How to create a database diagram.

- How to use a database diagram to view tables, primary key constraints, and foreign key constraints.


### Preparation

Start the 10985C-MIA-DC and 10985C-MIA-SQL virtual machines, and then log on to 10985C-MIA-SQL as **ADVENTUREWORKS\Student** with the password **Pa$$w0rd**.

### Demonstration Steps

1. In the **D:\Demofiles\Mod01** folder, right-click **Setup.cmd**, and then click **Run as administrator**.

2. In the **User Account Control** dialog box, click **Yes**, and wait for setup to complete.

3. Open **Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio**, and then connect to the **MIA-SQL** instance of the database engine by using Windows Authentication.

4. In **Object Explorer**, expand **Databases**, expand **AdventureWorks2016**, right-click **Database Diagrams**, and then click **New Database Diagram**.

5. If the **Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio** dialog box appears asking if you wish to create support objects for database diagramming, click **Yes**.

6. In the **Add Table** dialog box, press and hold down the CTRL key, click **Customer (Sales)**, click **SalesOrderDetail (Sales)**, click **SalesOrderHeader (Sales)**, click **ShipMethod (Purchasing)**, click **Add**, and then click **Close**.

7. Review the tables and note the following points:

	1. The **SalesOrderHeader (Sales)** table contains the **SalesOrderID**, which is the primary key column.

	2. The **SalesOrderDetail (Sales)** table also contains a **SalesOrderID** column.

8. In the **SalesOrderDetail (Sales)** table, right-click the **SalesOrderID** column, and then click **Properties**.

9. In the **Properties** window, click the **Description** field, and then click the ellipsis button (…). 

10. In the **Description Property** dialog box, note that the column is a primary key column, and that there is a foreign key that references the **SalesOrderID** column in the **SalesOrderHeader** table, and then click **Cancel**.

11. Click the line between the **Customer (Sales)** table and the **SalesOrderHeader (Sales)** table. This line represents a foreign key relationship.

12. In the **Properties** window, click **Description**, and then click the ellipsis button (…). 

13. In the **Description Property** dialog box, note that the foreign key references the **CustomerID** column in the **Customer (Sales)** table, and then click **Cancel**.

14. Close the database diagram window, and do not save any changes. Close SQL Server Management Studio.


©2016 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode "Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License"), additional terms may apply.  All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant.  This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.

  
