# Module 3: Normalization
# Demonstration: Normalizing to Third Normal Form

### Objectives

In this demonstration, you will see examples of:

-   Normalizing to first normal form.

-   Normalizing to second normal form.

-   Normalizing to third normal form.

### Demonstration Steps

1. In the **D:\\Demofiles\\Mod03** folder, double-click the **Normalize Book Data.xlsx** file.

2. On the **Raw Data** worksheet, review the data and note the following points:

	1. The worksheet contains data about a collection of books.

	2. There are multiple copies of the same book titles, and each copy might be a different pressing. This information is stored in repeating data group columns called **Copy 1**, **Copy 2**, and **Copy 3**.

3. On the **1NF** worksheet, note the changes that have been made to bring the table into first normal form. These changes include:

	1. Adding a composite primary key consisting of the **Book Title**, **Copy Number**, and **Pressing** columns.

	2. The repeating data group columns have been removed.

4. Note that the columns **Year Published**, **Author**, **Author Year of Birth**, and **Author Age** all contain repeating data values. This is because these columns are not functionally dependent on the whole of the primary key.

5. On the **2NF** worksheet, note the changes that have been made to conform to second normal form. The table has been decomposed into four tables: **Book**, **Author**, **Copy**, and **Pressing**. The columns in each table depend on the whole of the primary key in their respective tables.

6. On the **3NF** worksheet, note the change that has been made to ensure that the **Author** table conforms to third normal form. The **Author Age** column has been removed because it was transitively dependent on the primary key, through the **Author Date of Birth** non-key column. If required, the age of each author can be calculated by using the date of birth value, so it not necessary to store it.


©2016 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode "Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License"), additional terms may apply.  All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant.  This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.
